+++
title = "Tell People What They Did For You"
date = 2024-08-17
updated = 2024-08-18
draft = true

[taxonomies]
categories = ["thinking"]
tags = ["community", "feedback", "work"]

[extra]
lang = "en"
toc = true
show_comment = false
math = false
mermaid = false
cc_license = false
outdate_warn = false
+++

Feedback...

<!-- more -->

# No feedback, bad feedback

At different times in my worklife I've felt like I was "managing up",
or maybe even "_counselling_ up".

I've had managers or seniors who I knew were under a lot of pressure.
When they solved a problem or had an insight I would try to make them
aware that I recognised what they just did:

> That idea is really interesting. I hadn't heard of that approach before.

> After our last meeting I tried what you suggested and it made a huge difference. Thank you.

> Have you thought of saying this to the rest of the group? They could get a lot of value from it too.

They often responded positively:

> Yes, thanks for saying that! That is exactly what I was trying to do.

> That's nice to hear. It hasn't been universally popular and I've faced a lot of resistance.

> Thanks! You know, it's been difficult with everything else that's going on lately.

Sometimes they would seem a little embarrassed that they were getting unsolicited
feedback from a person of lower professional status.

Most often, I would get the impression that it was the first time in their recent
memory that anyone told them that they had done a good job.

They were in lonely positions, with teams looking to them for
help, guidance and feedback but nobody to offer them the same support.

Although I didn't expect reciprocation, it always surprised me when the same people 
didn't return the courtesy, especially when they were the ones in a mentoring role!

The main reasons for this — from what I could gather — were:

- A fear of making someone "too comfortable" and a desire to keep them seeking elusive praise
- A sense that great work was an expectation and not something worthy of remark
- An immediate instinct to exploit value rather than to acknowledge value
- An anticipation of some future moment, usually public, where _all would be revealed_

Just tell people what they did for you, whether they're a manager or intern, 
teacher or student, friend or competitor, fan or influencer.

Give the damn feedback and be nice about it.

You don't need to wait until the graduation,
the christmas party, the promotion round,
the drunken exchange, the elderly recollection,
the acknowledgements section...

Don't be satisfied that you have merely "provided feedback" either, and
whether it is "constructive" is just one aspect of good feedback.
The person receiving the feedback should feel encouraged to continue,
if the expectation is that they will — in fact — continue.
Feedback is an opportunity to correct mistakes but
also to make connections and create possibilities.
